Add ArviZ InfData Blog post (#405)
xarray-contrib/xarray.dev: src/posts/introducing-inference-data/index.md

# Load the saved results of a bayesian analysis from disk
import arviz as az

data = az.load_arviz_data("centered_eight")
data
```

<!-- https://xarray.dev/blog/introducing-pint-xarray -->

## The Life of a modern Bayesians

The utility of `az.InferenceData` will not be very apparent if we first don't talk about the life of a Modern Bayesian Statistician,
the PPL Designer, and what things used to be like before `az.IhnferenceData`.

### The Modern Bayesian Practitioner

Like most modern statisticians, the Modern Bayesian Statistician uses a computer to perform their work.
Many Probabilistic Programming Language (PPL) are available for this task, such as [Stan](https://mc-stan.org/),
[PyMC](https://www.pymc.io/), [Tensorflow Probability](https://www.tensorflow.org/probability), [NumPyro](http://pyro.ai/numpyro/) etc.

With probabilistic programming language in hand, the Bayesian then follows the workflow below, performing each of the various steps
as part of their analysis.

![Bayesian Workflow](https://bayesiancomputationbook.com/_images/Bayesian_workflow.png)

At each of these steps the PPLs generate many arrays, and not only single dimension arrays, but multi dimensional arrays.

> Sampling the prior predictive, running sampling, sampling from the posterior predictive, and even the input data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The prior predictive distribution, the posterior distribution, the posterior predictive distribution, the loglikelihood, and even the input data
```

are all numberical quantities that need to be captured and ordered to facilitate analysis.

> And as an individual statistician it's not enough to just store the numbers in arrays.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> Often these arrays need to be passed to specialized functions that get check for properties like convergence,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Often these arrays need to be passed to specialized functions in order to check for MCMC convergence, model comparison, or getting summaries from the posterior distribution.
```

> or for plotting.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

And once the individual statistician has completed their work, they may either want to save it to disk,
or share it with a colleague.

## The Modern PPL designer

Now consider a PPL designer. PPL designers typically want to focus on the core of the Bayesian inference,

> which is graph representation and sampling.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Including working with graph representation and samplers.
```

> However for their PPL to be useful they must ensure their users must have easy access to diagnostics,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However for their PPL to be useful they must ensure users have easy access to diagnostics,
```

visualizations, and model criticism tools.
Suddenly the scope of their codebase grows, and duplicative functionality now exists across

> the open source Bayesian Ecosystem

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the open source Bayesian ecosystem
```

## Life before az.InferenceData

Before `az.InferenceData` there wasn't a consistent object or method

> - Each PPL designer would have their own internal objects to store these

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Each PPL designer would have to implement their own internal objects
```

  - The objects may not be serializable to disk

> - All adjacent workflow libraries would need

Reviewer: I don't understand this sentence

> - The APIs and interfaces for all of these were inconsistent making life challenging for end useres

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The APIs and interfaces for all of these were inconsistent making life challenging for end users
```

>   - Folks using different PPLs would be in completely different ecosystems

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Folks using different PPLs would be isolated in completely different ecosystems,  even when the PPLs  share the same general programming language.
```

## How az.InferenceData works and its implementation

> `az.InferenceData` is an object that stores (nearly) of outputs of Bayesian Modeling in a consisntent manner.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`az.InferenceData` is an object that stores (nearly) all the outputs of Bayesian Modeling in a consistent manner.
```

Under the hood `az.InferenceData` is largely a collection of Xarray objects, with some utility functions built in as well.

> Xarray was the natural choice, especially for MCMC inference, because its ability to store, index, and perform calculations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Xarray was the natural choice, because storing  indexing, and performing calculations
```

> over multidimensional outputs is exactly what is needed to enable Bayesian workflows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
over multidimensional outputs are routine task for computational Bayesian modelers.
```

![InferenceData Architecture](https://python.arviz.org/en/stable/_images/InferenceDataStructure.png)

## How this enables ArviZ

With a consistent object that represents the outputs of PPLs, it became possible develop ArviZ,

> a unified library for model diagnostics and visualization.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a unified library for exploratory analysis of Bayesian models.
```

Now it didn't matter what PPL someone decided to use,
as long as they follow the InferenceData specification ArviZ will know "what to do".
This enables PPL designer to focus on the core of inference,

> and also ensures Bayesian Practitioners don't need to relearn the entire workflow if they decide to switch PPLs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and also ensures Bayesian Practitioners don't need to relearn the entire toolbox if they decide to switch PPLs.
```

### The benefit of Xarray

Xarray in turn simplifies the life of the ArviZ devs because we don't need to focus too much

> on the data store object, and instead can focus on the statistical computation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
on the data store object, and instead we can focus on the statistical computations.
```

> **Editing note** Should I mention ein stats?

Reviewer: Yes

Author: @oriol-abril Want to add some notes here?

Author: @OriolAbril (properly tagged)

Author: @OriolAbril second ping

Reviewer: maybe we could just skip this

---
title: 'Better Bayesian Workflows with Inference Data and Xarray'
date: '2022-12-17'
authors:
  - name: Ravin Kumar
    github: canyon289

>   - name: ArviZ Dev 2
>     github: someone

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - name: Oriol Abril-Pla
    github: OriolAbril 
  - name: Osvaldo Martin
    github: aloctavodia
```

are all numberical quantities that need to be captured and ordered to facilitate analysis.

Often these arrays need to be passed to specialized functions in order to check for MCMC convergence, model comparison, or getting summaries from the target distribution.

And once the individual statistician has completed their work, they may either want to save it to disk,
or share it with a colleague.

## The Modern PPL designer

Now consider a PPL designer. PPL designers typically want to focus on model building and inference: graph representation, samplers, symbolic differentiation speed and stability...
However for their PPL to be useful they must ensure users have easy access to diagnostics,
visualizations, and model criticism tools.
Suddenly the scope of their codebase grows, and duplicative functionality now exists across
the open source Bayesian ecosystem

## Life before az.InferenceData

Before `az.InferenceData` there wasn't a consistent object or method

- Each PPL designer would have to implement their own internal objects
  - The objects may not be serializable to disk

> - All adjacent workflow libraries would need

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- All adjacent workflow libraries would need
```
This sentence seems to be incomplete.

Author: Fixed

- The APIs and interfaces for all of these were inconsistent making life challenging for end users
  - Folks using different PPLs would be isolated in completely different ecosystems, even when the PPLs share the same general programming language.

## How az.InferenceData works and its implementation

`az.InferenceData` is an object that stores (nearly) all the outputs of Bayesian Modeling in a consistent manner.
Under the hood `az.InferenceData` is largely a collection of Xarray objects, with some utility functions built in as well.
Xarray was the natural choice, because storing indexing, and performing calculations
over multidimensional outputs are routine task for computational Bayesian modelers.

![InferenceData Architecture](https://python.arviz.org/en/stable/_images/InferenceDataStructure.png)

## How this enables ArviZ

> With a consistent object that represents the outputs of PPLs, it became possible develop ArviZ,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With a consistent object that represents the outputs of PPLs, it became possible to develop ArviZ,
```

a unified library for exploratory analysis of Bayesian models.
Now it didn't matter what PPL someone decided to use,
as long as they follow the InferenceData specification ArviZ will know "what to do".
This enables PPL designer to focus on the core of inference,
and also ensures Bayesian Practitioners don't need to relearn the entire toolbox if they decide to switch PPLs.

### The benefit of Xarray

Xarray in turn simplifies the life of the ArviZ devs because we don't need to focus too much
on the data store object, and instead we can focus on the statistical computations.
Of the [key features of Xarray](https://xarray.dev/#features) we directly utiilize

- Interoperability
- Opereations over named dimensions
- Value selection by label
- Vectorized operations
- Flexible and Extensible I/O backend API

**Editing note** Should I mention ein stats?
https://github.com/arviz-devs/xarray-einstats

## Conclusion

Xarray enables neat functionality, standardization, and simplication for Bayesian users.

> If you're a bayesian practioner we invite you to use ArviZ, and xarray by extension, to see how easy things are.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you're a Bayesian practitioner we invite you to use ArviZ, and xarray by extension, to see how easy things are.
```

Under the hood `az.InferenceData` is largely a collection of Xarray objects, with some utility functions built in as well.
Xarray was the natural choice, because storing indexing, and performing calculations
over multidimensional outputs are routine task for computational Bayesian modelers.

![InferenceData Architecture](https://python.arviz.org/en/stable/_images/InferenceDataStructure.png)

## How this enables ArviZ

With a consistent object that represents the outputs of PPLs, it became possible to develop ArviZ,
a unified library for exploratory analysis of Bayesian models.
Now it didn't matter what PPL someone decided to use,
as long as they follow the InferenceData specification ArviZ will know "what to do".
This enables PPL designer to focus on the core of inference,
and also ensures Bayesian Practitioners don't need to relearn the entire toolbox if they decide to switch PPLs.

### The benefit of Xarray

Xarray in turn simplifies the life of the ArviZ devs because we don't need to focus too much
on the data store object, and instead we can focus on the statistical computations.

> Of the [key features of Xarray](https://xarray.dev/#features) we directly utiilize

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Of the [key features of Xarray](https://xarray.dev/#features) we directly utilize
```

- Interoperability
- Opereations over named dimensions
- Value selection by label
- Vectorized operations
- Flexible and Extensible I/O backend API

> **Editing note** Should I mention ein stats?
> https://github.com/arviz-devs/xarray-einstats

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Tip**: In addition to all functions supported by xarray itself, the ArviZ project also maintains [xarray-einstats](https://einstats.python.arviz.org/en/latest/). It provides label aware wrappers for linear algebra (wrapping `numpy.linalg`), statistical computations like summary statistics, random sampling or working with distributions (wrapping `scipy.stats`), and reduce and rearrange (wrapping `einops`).
```

How does something like this sound? I know I am bad at marketing, so any help making this more catchy/inviting will be welcome.

Author: Added

---

> title: 'Better Bayesian Workflows with Inference Data and Xarray'

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
title: 'Better Bayesian Workflows with InferenceData and Xarray'
```

Are you referring to the class? or "inference data" as a type of data?

Author: The class

date: '2022-12-17'
authors:
  - name: Ravin Kumar
    github: canyon289
  - name: Oriol Abril-Pla
    github: OriolAbril
  - name: Osvaldo Martin
    github: aloctavodia
summary: "Xarray provides the core data model for ArviZ's InfrerenceData structure"
---

_TLDR: Xarray is the core of the `az.InferenceData` object. [ArviZ InferenceData](https://python.arviz.org/en/stable/api/generated/arviz.InferenceData.html) simplifies the Bayesian workflow, facilitates reproducibility, and enables interoperability between different Probabilistic Programming languages._

> <!-- Temporary Reference https://xarray.dev/blog/introducing-pint-xarray -->

Reviewer 4: Remove HTML comments to fix build errors:

```console

12:28:08.086 | Running build in San Francisco, USA (West) – sfo1
-- | --
12:28:08.131 | Cloning github.com/xarray-contrib/xarray.dev (Branch: inf_data, Commit: 6bf3c39)
12:28:09.272 | Cloning completed: 1.140s
12:28:12.365 | Running "vercel build"
12:28:12.943 | Vercel CLI 28.16.6
12:28:13.331 | Installing dependencies...
12:28:13.710 | yarn install v1.22.17
12:28:13.828 | [1/4] Resolving packages...
12:28:14.226 | success Already up-to-date.
12:28:14.242 | Done in 0.54s.
12:28:14.261 | Detected Next.js version: 13.1.6
12:28:14.263 | Running "yarn run build"
12:28:14.493 | yarn run v1.22.17
12:28:14.553 | $ next build
12:28:15.253 | info  - Linting and checking validity of types...
12:28:17.992 | info  - Creating an optimized production build...
12:28:18.028 | warn  - /api/github provided runtime 'experimental-edge'. It can be updated to 'edge' instead.
12:28:32.537 | warn  - You are using an experimental edge runtime, the API might change.
12:28:45.596 | info  - Compiled successfully
12:28:45.597 | info  - Collecting page data...
12:28:50.069 | info  - Generating static pages (0/18)
12:28:50.773 | info  - Generating static pages (4/18)
12:28:50.873 | info  - Generating static pages (8/18)
12:28:51.373 |  
12:28:51.373 | Error occurred prerendering page "/blog/introducing-inference-data". Read more: https://nextjs.org/docs/messages/prerender-error
12:28:51.373 | Error: [next-mdx-remote] error compiling MDX:
Expand 13 Lines
12:28:52.025 | > Build error occurred
12:28:52.028 | Error: Export encountered errors on following paths:
12:28:52.028 | /blog/[id]: /blog/introducing-inference-data
12:28:52.028 | at /vercel/path0/node_modules/next/dist/export/index.js:415:19
12:28:52.029 | at runMicrotasks (<anonymous>)
12:28:52.029 | at processTicksAndRejections (internal/process/task_queues.js:95:5)
12:28:52.029 | at async Span.traceAsyncFn (/vercel/path0/node_modules/next/dist/trace/trace.js:79:20)
12:28:52.029 | at async /vercel/path0/node_modules/next/dist/build/index.js:1400:21
12:28:52.030 | at async Span.traceAsyncFn (/vercel/path0/node_modules/next/dist/trace/trace.js:79:20)
12:28:52.030 | at async /vercel/path0/node_modules/next/dist/build/index.js:1259:17
12:28:52.030 | at async Span.traceAsyncFn (/vercel/path0/node_modules/next/dist/trace/trace.js:79:20)
12:28:52.030 | at async Object.build [as default] (/vercel/path0/node_modules/next/dist/build/index.js:66:29)
12:28:52.106 | error Command failed with exit code 1.

```

```suggestion
```

```python
# Load the saved results of a bayesian analysis from disk
import arviz as az

data = az.load_arviz_data("centered_eight")
data
```

> <!-- https://xarray.dev/blog/introducing-pint-xarray -->

Reviewer 4: Remove HTML comments to fix build errors

```suggestion
```

## The Life of a modern Bayesian

> The utility of `az.InferenceData` will not be very apparent if we first don't talk about the life of a Modern Bayesian Statistician,

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The utility of `az.InferenceData` will not be very apparent unless we first talk about the life of a Modern Bayesian Statistician,
```

> the PPL Designer, and what things used to be like before `az.InferenceData`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
the Probabilistic Programming Language (PPL) Designer, and what things used to be like before `az.InferenceData`.
```

### The Modern Bayesian Practitioner

Like most modern statisticians, the Modern Bayesian Statistician uses a computer to perform their work.

> Many Probabilistic Programming Language (PPL) are available for this task, such as [Stan](https://mc-stan.org/),

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Many PPLs are available for this task, such as [Stan](https://mc-stan.org/),
```

[PyMC](https://www.pymc.io/), [Tensorflow Probability](https://www.tensorflow.org/probability), [NumPyro](http://pyro.ai/numpyro/) etc.

With probabilistic programming language in hand, the Bayesian then follows the "Bayesian workflow" below, performing each of the various steps
as part of their analysis.

![Bayesian Workflow](https://bayesiancomputationbook.com/_images/Bayesian_workflow.png)

At each of these steps the PPLs generate many arrays, and not only single dimension arrays, but multi dimensional arrays.
The prior predictive distribution, the posterior distribution, the posterior predictive distribution, the log likelihood, and even the input data
are all numerical quantities that need to be captured and ordered to facilitate analysis.

> Often these arrays need to be passed to specialized functions in order to check for MCMC convergence, model comparison, or getting summaries from the target distribution.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Often these arrays need to be passed to specialized functions in order to check for Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) convergence, model comparison, or getting summaries from the target distribution.
```

And once the individual statistician has completed their work, they may either want to save it to disk,
or share it with a colleague.

## The Modern PPL designer

> Now consider a PPL designer. PPL designers typically want to focus on model building and inference: graph representation, samplers, symbolic differentiation speed and stability...

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Now consider a PPL designer. PPL designers typically want to focus on model building and inference: graph representation, samplers, symbolic differentiation speed and stability.
```

It's not clear what "graph representation" is.

> However for their PPL to be useful they must ensure users have easy access to diagnostics,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
However for their PPL to be useful they must ensure that users have easy access to diagnostics,
```

visualizations, and model criticism tools.
Suddenly the scope of their codebase grows, and duplicative functionality now exists across

> the open source Bayesian ecosystem

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
the open source Bayesian ecosystem.
```

## Life before az.InferenceData

> Before `az.InferenceData` there wasn't a consistent object or method

Reviewer 3: Can you add a line on what "object" and "method" represent please

Author: Yes

Author: Added a bit more explanation here.

- Each PPL designer would have to implement their own internal objects
  - The objects may not be serializable to disk
- All adjacent workflow libraries would only work with a subset of these objects, or would require users to restructure data each time.
- The APIs and interfaces for all of these were inconsistent making life challenging for end users
  - Folks using different PPLs would be isolated in completely different ecosystems, even when the PPLs share the same general programming language.

## How az.InferenceData works and its implementation

`az.InferenceData` is an object that stores (nearly) all the outputs of Bayesian Modeling in a consistent manner.
Under the hood `az.InferenceData` is largely a collection of Xarray objects, with some utility functions built in as well.

> Xarray was the natural choice, because storing indexing, and performing calculations

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Xarray was the natural choice, because storing indexes, and performing calculations
```
?

over multidimensional outputs are routine tasks for computational Bayesian modelers.

![InferenceData Architecture](https://python.arviz.org/en/stable/_images/InferenceDataStructure.png)

## How this enables ArviZ

With a consistent object that represents the outputs of PPLs, it became possible to develop ArviZ,
a unified library for exploratory analysis of Bayesian models.

> Now it didn't matter what PPL someone decided to use,

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Now it does not matter which PPL someone decides to use,
```

as long as they follow the InferenceData specification ArviZ will know "what to do".
This enables PPL designer to focus on the core of inference,
and also ensures Bayesian Practitioners don't need to relearn the entire toolbox if they decide to switch PPLs.

### The benefit of Xarray

> Xarray in turn simplifies the life of the ArviZ devs because we don't need to focus too much
> on the data store object, and instead we can focus on the statistical computations.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Xarray, in turn, simplifies the lives of the ArviZ developers because we do not need to focus too much on the data storage object, and instead, we can focus on the statistical computations.
```

> Of the [key features of Xarray](https://xarray.dev/#features) we directly utilize

Reviewer 4: We directly utilize the [following key features of Xarray](https://xarray.dev/#features):

- Interoperability
- Operations over named dimensions
- Value selection by label
- Vectorized operations
- Flexible and Extensible I/O backend API

## Xarray Einstats

The ArviZ project also maintains [xarray-einstats](https://einstats.python.arviz.org/en/latest/).

> It provides label aware wrappers for linear algebra (wrapping `numpy.linalg`), statistical computations like summary statistics, random sampling or working with distributions (wrapping `scipy.stats`), and reduce and rearrange (wrapping `einops`).

Reviewer 4: The ArviZ project also maintains [xarray-einstats](https://einstats.python.arviz.org/en/latest/), which provides label-aware wrappers for the following functionalities:

- Linear algebra (wrapping `numpy.linalg`)
- Statistical computations like summary statistics, random sampling, or working with distributions (wrapping `scipy.stats`)
- Reduce and rearrange operations (wrapping `einops`)

> The ArviZ project also maintains [xarray-einstats](https://einstats.python.arviz.org/en/latest/).
> It provides label aware wrappers for linear algebra (wrapping `numpy.linalg`), statistical computations like summary statistics, random sampling or working with distributions (wrapping `scipy.stats`), and reduce and rearrange (wrapping `einops`).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The ArviZ project also maintains [xarray-einstats](https://einstats.python.arviz.org/en/latest/), which provides label-aware wrappers for the following functionalities:

- Linear algebra (wrapping `numpy.linalg`)
- Statistical computations like summary statistics, random sampling, or working with distributions (wrapping `scipy.stats`)
- Reduce and rearrange operations (wrapping `einops`)
```

## Conclusion

Xarray enables neat functionality, standardization, and simplification for Bayesian users.

> If you're a Bayesian practitioner we invite you to use ArviZ, and xarray by extension, to see how easy things are.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you're a Bayesian practitioner we invite you to use [ArviZ](https://python.arviz.org/), and xarray by extension, to see how easy things are.
```

---
title: 'Better Bayesian Workflows with InferenceData and Xarray'

> date: '2022-12-17'

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
date: '2023-03-06'
```

Author: Yes! Love the enthusiasm

Reviewer 5: Pick a new day and we'll work to make it happen!

Author: Done 
```suggestion
date: '2023-03-14'
```

Author: Done 
```suggestion
date: '2023-03-21'
```

@OriolAbril think we can get this done in the next two days?

authors:
  - name: Ravin Kumar
    github: canyon289
  - name: Oriol Abril-Pla
    github: OriolAbril
  - name: Osvaldo Martin
    github: aloctavodia
summary: "Xarray provides the core data model for ArviZ's InfrerenceData structure"
---

> _TLDR: Xarray is the core of the `az.InferenceData` object. [ArviZ InferenceData](https://python.arviz.org/en/stable/api/generated/arviz.InferenceData.html) simplifies the Bayesian workflow, facilitates reproducibility, and enables interoperability between different Probabilistic Programming languages._

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
_TLDR: The Xarray Dataset provides is the core of the `arviz.InferenceData` object. [ArviZ InferenceData](https://python.arviz.org/en/stable/api/generated/arviz.InferenceData.html) simplifies the Bayesian workflow, facilitates reproducibility, and enables interoperability between different Probabilistic Programming languages._
```

```python
# Load the saved results of a bayesian analysis from disk
import arviz as az

data = az.load_arviz_data("centered_eight")

> data

Reviewer 5: Can we show the repr for this?

Reviewer 2: The repr is not very informative, it will look like:

```
Inference data with groups:
	> posterior
	> posterior_predictive
	> log_likelihood
	> sample_stats
	> prior
	> prior_predictive
	> observed_data
	> constant_data
```

If possible though, the html_repr is much more informative (built on top of the dataset one), it is the output of the 2nd code cell in https://python.arviz.org/en/stable/getting_started/WorkingWithInferenceData.html.

Reviewer 5: we should be able to put the html repr in the post.

Author: @OriolAbril I think we could show both the inferencedata repr, and then the repr of one of the groups, which is just an xarray repr. What do you think? Would that better highlight now the two are related?

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/7213793/230734449-ea2a7f5b-4521-40ab-8509-c6c8dc5f8c6f.png)

Reviewer 2: I think it is simpler to use the inferencedata html repr directly, omce any of the groups is expanded it becomes clear and explicit they are xarray.Dataset objects

Author: Really want to get this over the line. What does it take? Should I copy the html from here?

https://python.arviz.org/en/stable/getting_started/XarrayforArviZ.html#an-introduction-to-each

is it a matter of copying it from the static notebook in github, or do I need to do it from jupyter?

```

## The Life of a modern Bayesian

The utility of `az.InferenceData` will not be very apparent unless we first talk about the life of a Modern Bayesian Statistician,
the Probabilistic Programming Language (PPL) Designer, and what things used to be like before `az.InferenceData`.

### The Modern Bayesian Practitioner

Like most modern statisticians, the Modern Bayesian Statistician uses a computer to perform their work.

> Many PPLs are available for this task, such as [Stan](https://mc-stan.org/),

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Many PPLs are available for this kind of work, such as [Stan](https://mc-stan.org/),
```

are all numerical quantities that need to be captured and ordered to facilitate analysis.

Often these arrays need to be passed to specialized functions in order to check for Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) convergence, model comparison, or getting summaries from the target distribution.

And once the individual statistician has completed their work, they may either want to save it to disk,
or share it with a colleague.

## The Modern PPL designer

Now consider a PPL designer. PPL designers typically want to focus on model building and inference: graph representation, samplers, symbolic differentiation speed and stability.
However for their PPL to be useful they must ensure that users have easy access to diagnostics,
visualizations, and model criticism tools.
Suddenly the scope of their codebase grows, and duplicative functionality now exists across
the open source Bayesian ecosystem.

## Life before az.InferenceData

Before `az.InferenceData` there wasn't a consistent object or method both for the user or for the PPL library maintainers.
Things like posteriors, prior predictives, observed data, and sampler stats could be stored in their own ways,

> For example one PPL may store their modeling outputs in a dictionary, other may have used plain numpy arrays, a third had its own custom class.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
For example one PPL may store their modeling outputs in a dictionary, other may have used plain NumPy arrays, a third had its own custom class.
```

And that's even before considering the shapes and indices of the array.

This all meant

> - Each PPL designer would have to implement their own internal objects
>   - The objects may not be serializable to disk
> - All adjacent workflow libraries would only work with a subset of these objects, or would require users to restructure data each time.
> - The APIs and interfaces for all of these were inconsistent making life challenging for end users
>   - Folks using different PPLs would be isolated in completely different ecosystems, even when the PPLs share the same general programming language.

Reviewer 5: Just some light restructuring to avoid the nested list:

```suggestion
- Each PPL designer would have to implement their own data objects and would have to solve lots problems like how to serialize data to disk.
- All adjacent workflow libraries would only work with a subset of these objects, or would require users to restructure data each time.
- The APIs and interfaces for all of these were inconsistent making life challenging for end user. Users of different PPLs would be isolated in completely different ecosystems, even when the PPLs share the same general programming language.
```

## How az.InferenceData works and its implementation

`az.InferenceData` is an object that stores (nearly) all the outputs of Bayesian Modeling in a consistent manner.
Under the hood `az.InferenceData` is largely a collection of Xarray objects, with some utility functions built in as well.
Xarray was the natural choice, because storing indexes, and performing calculations

> over multidimensional outputs are routine tasks for computational Bayesian modelers.

Reviewer 5: Can you briefly expand on this to indicate if/how InferenceData takes advantage of Xarray's named dimensions, coordinates, and/or flexible metadata.

Author: Maybe we can say something to the effect of,

> named dimensions let us directly interact with the dimensions of interest, such as the quantities being studied. Importantly they also remove implicit assumptions of which dimension represents chains and draws, dimensions while necessary for sampling, are not so interesting when trying to perform inference, similar to how batch dimensions are a computational nuance, but not a modeling nuance. 

> Often in Bayesian analysis we tend to reduce multidimensional arrays into lesser multidimensional arrays, for instance taking the mean across a distribution while leaving the other dimensions untouched. Xarray named dimensions also let us do this in a readable and repeatable way agnostic of PPL or model construction.

Author: Updated!

---

_TLDR: The Xarray Dataset provides is the core of the `arviz.InferenceData` object. [ArviZ InferenceData](https://python.arviz.org/en/stable/api/generated/arviz.InferenceData.html) simplifies the Bayesian workflow, facilitates reproducibility, and enables interoperability between different Probabilistic Programming languages._

```python
# Load the saved results of a bayesian analysis from disk
import arviz as az

data = az.load_arviz_data("non_centered_eight")
data
```

<RawHTML filePath='/posts/introducing-inference-data/data.html' />

## The Life of a modern Bayesian

The utility of `az.InferenceData` will not be very apparent unless we first talk about the life of a Modern Bayesian Statistician,
the Probabilistic Programming Language (PPL) Designer, and what things used to be like before `az.InferenceData`.

### The Modern Bayesian Practitioner

Like most modern statisticians, the Modern Bayesian Statistician uses a computer to perform their work.
Many PPLs are available for this kind of work, such as [Stan](https://mc-stan.org/),
[PyMC](https://www.pymc.io/), [Tensorflow Probability](https://www.tensorflow.org/probability), [NumPyro](http://pyro.ai/numpyro/) etc.

> With probabilistic programming language in hand, the Bayesian then follows the "Bayesian workflow" below, performing each of the various steps

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
With a probabilistic programming language in hand, the Bayesian then follows the "Bayesian workflow" below, performing each of the various steps
```

are all numerical quantities that need to be captured and ordered to facilitate analysis.

Often these arrays need to be passed to specialized functions in order to check for Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) convergence, model comparison, or getting summaries from the target distribution.

And once the individual statistician has completed their work, they may either want to save it to disk,
or share it with a colleague.

## The Modern PPL designer

Now consider a PPL designer. PPL designers typically want to focus on model building and inference: graph representation, samplers, symbolic differentiation speed and stability.
However for their PPL to be useful they must ensure that users have easy access to diagnostics,
visualizations, and model criticism tools.
Suddenly the scope of their codebase grows, and duplicative functionality now exists across
the open source Bayesian ecosystem.

## Life before az.InferenceData

Before `az.InferenceData` there wasn't a consistent object or method both for the user or for the PPL library maintainers.

> Things like posteriors, prior predictives, observed data, and sampler stats could be stored in their own ways,

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Things like posteriors, prior predictives, observed data, and sampler stats could be stored in their own ways.
```

- All adjacent workflow libraries would only work with a subset of these objects, or would require users to restructure data each time.
- The APIs and interfaces for all of these were inconsistent making life challenging for end user. Users of different PPLs would be isolated in completely different ecosystems, even when the PPLs share the same general programming language.

## How az.InferenceData works and its implementation

`az.InferenceData` is an object that stores (nearly) all the outputs of Bayesian Modeling in a consistent manner.
Under the hood `az.InferenceData` is largely a collection of Xarray objects, with some utility functions built in as well.
Xarray was the natural choice, because storing indexes, and performing calculations
over multidimensional outputs are routine tasks for computational Bayesian modelers.
Named dimensions let us directly interact with the dimensions of interest, such as the quantities being studied.
Importantly they also remove implicit assumptions of which dimension represents chains and draws,\
dimensions while necessary for sampling, are not so interesting when trying to perform inference,

> similar to how batch dimensions are a computational nuance, but not a modeling nuance.

Reviewer 5: Something seems off here but I'm not sure how to edit it appropriately.

Author: I reedited it, let me know if you like how it sounds now

This enables PPL designer to focus on the core of inference,
and also ensures Bayesian Practitioners don't need to relearn the entire toolbox if they decide to switch PPLs.

### The benefit of Xarray

Xarray, in turn, simplifies the lives of the ArviZ developers because we do not need to focus too much on the data storage object, and instead, we can focus on the statistical computations.
Of the [key features of Xarray](https://xarray.dev/#features) we directly utilize

- Interoperability
- Operations over named dimensions
- Value selection by label
- Vectorized operations
- Flexible and Extensible I/O backend API

## Xarray Einstats

The ArviZ project also maintains [xarray-einstats](https://einstats.python.arviz.org/en/latest/), which provides label-aware wrappers for the following functionalities:

- Linear algebra (wrapping `numpy.linalg`)
- Statistical computations like summary statistics, random sampling, or working with distributions (wrapping `scipy.stats`)
- Reduce and rearrange operations (wrapping `einops`)

## Conclusion

Xarray enables neat functionality, standardization, and simplification for Bayesian users.

> If you're a Bayesian practitioner we invite you to use [ArviZ](https://python.arviz.org/), and xarray by extension, to see how easy things are.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
If you're a Bayesian practitioner we invite you to use [ArviZ](https://python.arviz.org/), and Xarray by extension, to see how easy things are.
```

---
title: 'Better Bayesian Workfllows with Inference Data and Xarray'

> date: '2022-12-17'

Reviewer 5: TODO: update date before merging

Author: @aloctavodia @OriolAbril want to add your names in the lines just below here?

authors:
  - name: Ravin Kumar
    github: canyon289
  - name: Justus Magin

>     github: keewis

Reviewer 5: TODO: update authors as appropriate

> summary: 'Xarray now supports unit-aware operations by wrapping pint arrays'

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
summary: "Xarray provides the core data model for ArviZ's InfrerenceData structure"
```

---

> _TLDR: Xarray is the core of the `az.InferenceData` object. [ArviZ InferenceData](INSERT LINK) simplifies the Bayesian workflow, facilitates reproducibility, and enables interoperability between different Probabilistic Programming languages._

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
_TLDR: Xarray is the core of the `az.InferenceData` object. [ArviZ InferenceData](https://python.arviz.org/en/stable/api/generated/arviz.InferenceData.html) simplifies the Bayesian workflow, facilitates reproducibility, and enables interoperability between different Probabilistic Programming languages._
```

Is this the link you want? Or perhaps https://python.arviz.org/en/stable/schema/schema.html#terminology would be better?

<!-- Temporary Reference https://xarray.dev/blog/introducing-pint-xarray -->

```python
# Load the saved results of a bayesian analysis from disk
import arviz as az

data = az.load_arviz_data("centered_eight")
data
```

<!-- https://xarray.dev/blog/introducing-pint-xarray -->

## The Life of a modern Bayesians

The utility of `az.InferenceData` will not be very apparent if we first don't talk about the life of a Modern Bayesian Statistician,
the PPL Designer, and what things used to be like before `az.IhnferenceData`.

### The Modern Bayesian Practitioner

Like most modern statisticians, the Modern Bayesian Statistician uses a computer to perform their work.

> Many Probabilistic Programming Language are available for this task, such as [Stan](https://mc-stan.org/),

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Many Probabilistic Programming Language (PPL) are available for this task, such as [Stan](https://mc-stan.org/),
```

[PyMC](https://www.pymc.io/), [Tensorflow Probability](https://www.tensorflow.org/probability), [NumPyro](http://pyro.ai/numpyro/) etc.

> With probabilistic programming language in hand, the Bayesian then follows the workflow below, performing each of the various steps

Reviewer 5: final sentence needs to be reworked to introduce the "workflow" concept.

And once the individual statistician has completed their work, they may either want to save it to disk,
or share it with a colleague.

## The Modern PPL designer

Now consider a PPL designer. PPL designers typically want to focus on the core of the Bayesian inference,
which is graph representation and sampling.
However for their PPL to be useful they must ensure their users must have easy access to diagnostics,
visualizations, and model criticism tools.
Suddenly the scope of their codebase grows, and duplicative functionality now exists across
the open source Bayesian Ecosystem

## Life before az.InferenceData

Before `az.InferenceData` there wasn't a consistent object or method

- Each PPL designer would have their own internal objects to store these
  - The objects may not be serializable to disk
- All adjacent workflow libraries would need
- The APIs and interfaces for all of these were inconsistent making life challenging for end useres
  - Folks using different PPLs would be in completely different ecosystems

## How az.InferenceData works and its implementation

`az.InferenceData` is an object that stores (nearly) of outputs of Bayesian Modeling in a consisntent manner.

> Under the hood `az.InferenceData` is largely a collection of xarray objects, with some utility functions built in as well.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Under the hood `az.InferenceData` is largely a collection of Xarray objects, with some utility functions built in as well.
```

Xarray was the natural choice, especially for MCMC inference, because its ability to store, index, and perform calculations
over multidimensional outputs is exactly what is needed to enable Bayesian workflows.

![InferenceData Architecture](https://python.arviz.org/en/stable/_images/InferenceDataStructure.png)

## How this enables ArviZ

With a consistent object that represents the outputs of PPLs, it became possible develop ArviZ,
a unified library for model diagnostics and visualization.
Now it didn't matter what PPL someone decided to use,
as long as they follow the InferenceData specification ArviZ will know "what to do".
This enables PPL designer to focus on the core of inference,
and also ensures Bayesian Practitioners don't need to relearn the entire workflow if they decide to switch PPLs.

> ### The benefit of Xarrayu
> 
> Xarray in turnsimplifies the life of the ArviZ devs because we don't need to focus too much
> on the data store object, and instead can focus on the statistical computation.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
### The benefit of Xarray

Xarray in turn simplifies the life of the ArviZ devs because we don't need to focus too much
on the data store object, and instead can focus on the statistical computation.
```

`az.InferenceData` is an object that stores (nearly) of outputs of Bayesian Modeling in a consisntent manner.
Under the hood `az.InferenceData` is largely a collection of Xarray objects, with some utility functions built in as well.
Xarray was the natural choice, especially for MCMC inference, because its ability to store, index, and perform calculations
over multidimensional outputs are routine task for computational Bayesian modelers.

![InferenceData Architecture](https://python.arviz.org/en/stable/_images/InferenceDataStructure.png)

## How this enables ArviZ

With a consistent object that represents the outputs of PPLs, it became possible develop ArviZ,
a unified library for exploratory analysis of Bayesian models.
Now it didn't matter what PPL someone decided to use,
as long as they follow the InferenceData specification ArviZ will know "what to do".
This enables PPL designer to focus on the core of inference,
and also ensures Bayesian Practitioners don't need to relearn the entire toolbox if they decide to switch PPLs.

### The benefit of Xarray

Xarray in turn simplifies the life of the ArviZ devs because we don't need to focus too much

> on the data store object, and instead we can focus on the statistical computations.

Reviewer 2: In case it helps, 5 out of the 8 key features listed in https://xarray.dev/#features: the first 4 and the last are key to ArviZ design.

Author: Added
